Migration guidance for Windows Performance Counters (#45943)
dotnet/docs: docs/core/diagnostics/migrate-from-windows-performance-counters.md

---
title: Migrate from .NET Windows Performance Counters to .NET Core metrics
description: Learn how to migrate from .NET Framework Windows Performance Counters to .NET Core/NET 5+ metrics using EventCounters and Meters.
ms.date: 04/27/2025
---

> # Migrate from .NET Windows Performance Counters to .NET Core metrics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Migrate from .NET Framework Windows Performance Counters to .NET metrics
```

> .NET Framework applications running on Windows can use Windows Performance Counters for monitoring application health and performance. However, in .NET Core and later versions, the platform provides [cross-platform alternatives](compare-metric-apis.md) through the [EventCounters](./event-counters.md) and [System.Diagnostics.Metrics](./metrics.md) APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.NET Framework applications, which only run on Windows, can use Windows Performance Counters to monitor application health and performance. However, in .NET Core and later versions, the platform provides [cross-platform alternatives](compare-metric-apis.md) through the [EventCounters](./event-counters.md) and [System.Diagnostics.Metrics](./metrics.md) APIs.
```

## A short history of .NET metrics

.NET applications can be monitored using different mechanisms depending on the .NET version and platform:

- **.NET Framework**: Primarily uses Windows Performance Counters (Windows only)
- **.NET Core 3.0-3.1, .NET 5+**: Introduced EventCounters (cross-platform) and built-in [runtime metrics](./available-counters.md#systemruntime-counters), [networking metrics](./available-counters.md#systemnethttp-counters), and [ASP.NET metrics](./available-counters.md#microsoft-aspnetcore-server-kestrel-counters) using these APIs
- **.NET 6+**: Added System.Diagnostics.Metrics API (cross-platform, OpenTelemetry compatible)
- **.NET 8+**: Added built-in [networking metrics](./built-in-metrics-system-net.md) and [ASP.NET metrics](/aspnet/core/log-mon/metrics/built-in) using the new System.Diagnostics.Metrics API
- **.NET 9+**: Added built-in [runtime metrics](./built-in-metrics-runtime.md) using the new System.Diagnostics.Metrics API

The newer metrics systems offer several advantages:

- **Cross-platform operation**: Works on Windows, Linux, macOS
- **Container-friendly**: Works in containerized environments

> - **Modern tooling**: Integration with OpenTelemetry and observability platforms

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Modern tooling**: Integrates with OpenTelemetry and observability platforms
```

- **Supports xcopy install**: No additional installation steps or privileges are required

> See the [Metrics API comparison](compare-metric-apis.md) for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information, see the [Metrics API comparison](compare-metric-apis.md).
```

> ## Collecting metrics in modern .NET applications

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Collect metrics in modern .NET applications
```

> See the [System.Diagnostics.Metrics](./metrics-collection.md) and [EventCounters](./event-counters.md) guides to collect and analyze metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To collect and analyze metrics, see the [System.Diagnostics.Metrics](./metrics-collection.md) and [EventCounters](./event-counters.md) guides.
```

> ## Mapping common Windows Performance Counters to modern metrics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Map common Windows Performance Counters to modern metrics
```

> If the monitoring system for your .NET Framework application is using runtime provided Windows Performance Counters, you will need to select alternative [EventCounters](./event-counters.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the monitoring system for your .NET Framework application uses runtime-provided Windows Performance Counters, you'll need to select alternative [EventCounters](./event-counters.md)
```

> or [System.Diagnostics.Metrics](./metrics.md) based metrics instead. The tables below show alternatives for many common counters. Not all .NET Framework counters have been ported to new alternatives.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or [System.Diagnostics.Metrics](./metrics.md)-based metrics instead. The following tables show alternatives for many common counters. Not all .NET Framework counters have been ported to new alternatives.
```

> In some cases infrequently used counters were discontinued and in other cases implementation changes in the platform have made certain counters irrelevant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In some cases, infrequently used counters were discontinued, and in other cases, implementation changes in the platform have made certain counters irrelevant.
```

| `.NET CLR Memory\# Gen 0 Collections` | `System.Runtime\Gen 0 GC Count` (`gen-0-gc-count`) | `System.Runtime\dotnet.gc.collections` with attribute `gc.heap.generation=gen0` |
| `.NET CLR Memory\# Gen 1 Collections` | `System.Runtime\Gen 1 GC Count` (`gen-1-gc-count`) | `System.Runtime\dotnet.gc.collections` with attribute `gc.heap.generation=gen1` |
| `.NET CLR Memory\# Gen 2 Collections` | `System.Runtime\Gen 2 GC Count` (`gen-2-gc-count`) | `System.Runtime\dotnet.gc.collections` with attribute `gc.heap.generation=gen2` |
| `.NET CLR Memory\% Time in GC` | `System.Runtime\% Time in GC since last GC` (`time-in-gc`) | `System.Runtime\dotnet.gc.pause.time` (calculate as percentage of total time) |
| `.NET CLR Memory\# Total committed Bytes` | None | `System.Runtime\dotnet.gc.last_collection.memory.committed_size` |
| `.NET CLR Memory\Large Object Heap Size` | `System.Runtime\LOH Size` (`loh-size`) | `System.Runtime\dotnet.gc.last_collection.heap.size` with attribute `gc.heap.generation=loh` |
| `.NET CLR Memory\Allocated Bytes/sec` | `System.Runtime\Allocation Rate` (`alloc-rate`) | Calculate rate from `System.Runtime\dotnet.gc.heap.total_allocated` |

> [!NOTE]

> > dotnet.gc.pause.time allows an improved calculation that avoids some undesirable behavior in the older `% Time in GC` metric. `% Time in GC` computed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> `dotnet.gc.pause.time` allows an improved calculation that avoids some undesirable behavior in the older `% Time in GC` metric. `% Time in GC` computed
```

> 100 * `pause_time_in_most_recent_GC` / `time_between_most_recent_two_GCs`. In some cases two GCs would occur very close together producing a high value
> based on a tiny non-representative portion of the overall time interval. `gc.heap.pause.time` accumulates the total time the GC has paused application threads

> > so far in a process which allows computing the GC pause time during any measured time interval. This is a truer measurement of GC overhead but the change in calculation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> so far in a process, which allows computing the GC pause time during any measured time interval. This is a truer measurement of GC overhead, but the change in calculation
```

> > means the metrics may not match even when the underlying GC behavior is unchanged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> means the metrics might not match even when the underlying GC behavior is unchanged.
```

| `.NET CLR Networking\Bytes Received` | `System.Net.Sockets\Bytes Received` (`bytes-received`) | None |
| `.NET CLR Networking\Bytes Sent` | `System.Net.Sockets\Bytes Sent` (`bytes-sent`) | None |
| `.NET CLR Networking\Connections Established` | `System.Net.Sockets\Outgoing Connections Established` (`outgoing-connections-established`) | None |
| `.NET CLR Networking\Datagrams Received` | `System.Net.Sockets\Datagrams Received` (`datagrams-received`) | None |
| `.NET CLR Networking\Datagrams Sent` | `System.Net.Sockets\Datagrams Sent` (`datagrams-sent`) | None |

### DNS networking counters

| Windows Performance Counter | EventCounter equivalent | Metrics API equivalent |
|----------------------------|--------------------------|------------------------|
| `.NET CLR Networking\DNS Lookups` | `System.Net.NameResolution\DNS Lookups Requested` (`dns-lookups-requested`) | Sum the histogram buckets in `System.Net.NameResolution\dns.lookup.duration` |
| `.NET CLR Networking\DNS Resolution Time` | `System.Net.NameResolution\Average DNS Lookup Duration` (`dns-lookups-duration`) | `System.Net.NameResolution\dns.lookup.duration` |

### HttpWebRequest counters

> HttpWebRequest has been superceded by HttpClient. See the HttpClient [EventCounters](./available-counters.md#systemnethttp-counters) and [System.Diagnostics.Metrics](./built-in-metrics-system-net.md#systemnethttp) to learn what metrics are built-in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`HttpWebRequest` has been superseded by <xref:System.Net.Http.HttpClient>. To learn what metrics are built-in, see the HttpClient [EventCounters](./available-counters.md#systemnethttp-counters) and [System.Diagnostics.Metrics](./built-in-metrics-system-net.md#systemnethttp).
```

### ASP.NET counters

> ASP.NET has changed dramatically between .NET Framework and .NET Core. Many counters are obsolete or are measured differently than in the past. See the ASP.NET [EventCounters](./available-counters.md#microsoftaspnetcorehosting-counters) and [System.Diagnostics.Metrics](/aspnet/core/log-mon/metrics/built-in) to learn what metrics are built-in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ASP.NET has changed dramatically between .NET Framework and .NET Core. Many counters are obsolete or are measured differently than in the past. To learn what metrics are built-in, see the ASP.NET [EventCounters](./available-counters.md#microsoftaspnetcorehosting-counters) and [System.Diagnostics.Metrics](/aspnet/core/log-mon/metrics/built-in).
```
